# Entropy

# Irreversibility

Entropy is a theoretical quantity that explains irreversibility in physics. Known laws of physics are reversible, which means some physical process would be equally valid both forwards or backwards in time. (For everyday phsyics, this statement is exactly true, whereas for some processes in high energy physics the time-reversed version of a process would also have to be mirror-image reversed as well in order to be valid.) However, in ordinary experience, many unexceptional processes would be quite exceptional if they were reversed. No one has ever experienced a convergence of sound waves into a puddle of liquid and pieces of glass sufficient to project them into the air and together in has hand as an unbroken cup of hot tea but many people have experienced the time-reversed version of such a process.

Thus, we observe that physics is irreversible on an everday scale but in controlled conditions designed to experiment with fundamental processes, physics is reversible. Intuitively, the resolution of this apparent paradox follows from a statistical understanding of the physics of our everday experience. Not knowing the precise interactions of all particles around us, from our perspective, the evolution of our everyday system needs to be treated as random. The relevant features of our experience do not depend on the exact position of every particle in our environment. Rather, many possible configurations of matter would result in indistinguishable experiences. 

The key to the argument is to note that different configurations of matter might be indistinguishable from vastly different numbers of similar configurations. This would mean that someone who expected his system to evolve randomly would expect some experiences to be vastly more likely than others. A configuration that is similar to fewer others is considered to be low entropy and one that is similar to many others is high entropy. Evolution from low to high entropy is likely, whereas high to low is unlikely. To put it concretely, here are vastly more ways for a tea cup to fall and break and for tea to spill than for tea to be prepared properly. 

## Entropy as Disorder

Entropy is often characterized as an expression of the disorder of a system. This characterization certainly raises more questions than it answers because disorder would seem to be potentially an obscure property of some system. In real life, order can appear superficially to be disorder and vice versa. Therefore, how could we possibly quantify disorder? 

In fact, entropy is not a quantity that can be measured in real systems. It can only be applied objectively to theoretical systems whose nature is given by hypothesis. In a real life system, it would only be with a complete understanding that one could say how disordered it really was. In science we never truly know that we have a complete understanding of anything. Rather, our theories tend to get better over time as more observations and analyses are done. Therefore, any purported expression of the disorder of some real system would have to be understood as a theoretical claim supported by an understanding of the nature of the system in question, which would be the result of analysis, not antecedent to it. 

Thus, I would say that entropy as disorder, though not inaccurate, is quite confusing and requires a lot of philosophical context to make sense of it, whereas entropy as an explanation for irreversibility more directly approaches the fundamental idea. 

## The Second Law of Thermodynamics

If entropy is not an objective or observable quantity, what of the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the entropy always increases for irreversible processes? How can there be a law about an unobservable theoretical construct? The second law is not a law of physics in the same sense that gravity is a law of physics or even that the first law of thermodynamics, which states that energy is conserved, is a law of physics. These laws can be tested empirically, whereas the second law cannot. 

When entropy was first described, physicists inferred its existence but did not understand what it was. Plank, for example, believed that entropy was a fundamental quantity like energy that would eventually be obhserved directly. However, he was disappointed when Boltzman was able to explain it as emerging out of statistical mechanics because he wanted to be working on fundamental laws, not emergent quantities. Before Boltzman's work, physicists did not understand entropy as relating to disorder. Instead, entropy was understood as a quantity whose increase expressed irreversibility in physics. 

Thus the second law of thermodynamics, despite being an important principle, is not a real law of physics but was promoted to one due to a mistaken understanding of entropy as an emprical rather than a theoretical concept. The second law of thermodynamics resembles praxeology more than it resembles other laws of physics because they both have to do with laws about ideal things like value that we ascribe to the world but cannot observe.   
